Clarify functionality pass-through for applications (#36)
kemitchell/api-copyleft-license: license.md

## Applications

> The purpose of this exception to [Copyleft](#copyleft) is to encourage cooperative development of this software, minimizing duplication of effort across competing substitutes.

Reviewer: The thing I'm nitpicking&mdash;and it's definitely just a nitpick!&mdash;is that the "encouraging cooperation" and the "minimizing duplication of effort" are due to the copyleft terms. This exception is providing permissive terms, and the permissive terms don't encourage cooperation, they encourage use of this software by folks who just want to apply it to their proprietary application, right?

I saw elsewhere that you're trying to avoid the term "proprietary", which makes sense, I guess it's kind of a Stallmanism; another wording I was thinking of was "reserving rights". As in, "The purpose of this exception to Copyleft is to allow you to reserve all rights to applications that you build with the software, so long as they are not competing substitutes that undermine cooperative development of this software."

If you want an exception section to be positively encouraging cooperative development, perhaps it would make more sense to structure the license as a whole to be permissive-with-exceptions rather than copyleft-with-exceptions?

Author: @laughinghan You're right about the purpose of the exception versus the purpose of the copyleft scheme overall. That occurred to me, too. I should have known you'd go right to it!

I _am_ avoiding "proprietary", but not for any hidden reason. Open licensing wonks use that term in a way totally peculiar to their tribe: "not open". Lawyers don't understand it the same way, or even use it much in this context, for any meaning. So we can't rely on it for any specific content without calling that kind of usage out. Which doesn't seem worth the trouble.

I hear you on permissive-with-exceptions. But I think there are good reasons we tend to see copyleft-with-exceptions instead. It's really hard to talk about that generally, without referencing specific licenses. But I think the most important consideration is what happens when terms aren't crystal clear about whether copyleft triggers in a particular situation. Starting with "contribute back" as the general rule, and carving out exceptions from there, helps to defend the general thrust toward requiring contribution. It's fail-open, rather than fail-closed, so to speak.

Author: Addressed in 056266b67e09e5ada222e56b832a52d6d6c95ad0

> The purpose of this exception to [Copyleft](#copyleft) is to encourage cooperative development of this software by prohibiting use of this software to create competing, proprietary substitutes.

Reviewer: Strictly speaking, the purpose described here is actually the purpose of the exception to this exception, right? I do have trouble articulating what I think better describes the purpose of this exception, though. Something something positive, collaborative community, rather than mutually destructive competition?

What do you think of something like the following? 

```suggestion
The purpose of this exception to [Copyleft](#copyleft) is to allow you to build proprietary software that uses this software, while encouraging cooperative development of this software by prohibiting use of this software to create competing, proprietary substitutes.
```

Reviewer: Sorry if the email about the above comment is out of date---I edited the comment on GitHub several times after submitting it.

Author: > Strictly speaking, the purpose described here is actually the purpose of the exception to this exception, right?

Ouch!

> You need not contribute any application that only invokes this software's functionality through the interfaces this software exposes, without exposing this software's interfaces or functionality to users or other software to such an extent that it becomes a practical substitute for this software.

Reviewer: I think I liked "software" better than "any application", in the first part of the sentence&mdash;application could be interpreted to mean an "app" as opposed to a higher-level service that is backed by a lower-level service provided by this software.

I like "users or other software", since I feel like we do want to cover apps.

"Practical substitute" seems kinda vague, but maybe in an intentional way? Like putting "reasonable" all over the place in contracts, that's the part you _want_ to be hashing out in court/at the negotiating table. (At least, based on my impression of lawyering.) I do wonder if we could be _slightly_ less vague, maybe something like, "generally understood in the industry to be a substitute" or "generally accepted by the industry as a substitute" or "commonly used and recommended in the industry as a potential substitute", or something.

I kind of like that last one. Still not a lawyer but my understanding of what we're aiming for is to, in e.g. the case of the bioinformatics database and general database, we're aiming to calibrate the wording so that the negotiating leverage we'd have is appropriate for how arguable it is that the bioinformatics database is a substitute vs an application of the general database. (_Appropriate_ leverage, because if it's too little then this license is toothless, and if it's too much then people don't want to build their application with our software even though we would want them to.) So, if the bioinformatics database can only store RNA & DNA strings and one eclectic hacker builds their email marketing app with a custom ORM (Object-RNA/DNA Mapping), then it'd still be hard to argue it's "commonly used and recommended" as a substitute. Whereas if the bioinformatics database merely optimized RNA & DNA string search, then you'd see bioinformatics researchers who were previously using the general database migrate to the bioinformatics-specific one, even if the API were slightly incompatible.

Author: > I think I liked "software" better than "any application", in the first part of the sentence

You're right. And I've made this mistake before, in Parity.

My intent here wasn't to evoke the general meaning of "application", but rather to pick a name for "the things that don't have to be contributed back".

> I like "users or other software", since I feel like we do want to cover apps.

Exactly what I had in mind.

> "Practical substitute" seems kinda vague, but maybe in an intentional way?

Correct, alas.

I'm convinced there's no objectively verifiable, doubtlessly administrable fact of development, like whether a file was excerpted or modified under MPLv2, that we can rely on to implement the idea of an application, as distinct from a change, extension, or wrapper. So we're going to have to accept some fuzziness around the rule.

> we're aiming to calibrate the wording so that the negotiating leverage we'd have is appropriate for how arguable it is that the bioinformatics database is a substitute vs an application of the general database

Correct. And very lawyerly of you to say so.

The general reflex when accepting intentional fuzziness is to set a kind of "meta rule" for interpretation. If a case is close, which way do we err?

I'm thinking more and more that I should simply accept the fuzziness of competition/substitution, and set that kind of meta rule. Probably to err on the side of requiring contribution.

Author: I've added a meta rule favoring contribution in 1f8ff7d7a6a7b751ea2b65b5291aa5c58cb65a06

> You need not contribute software that only invokes this software's functionality through the interfaces this software exposes, without exposing this software's interfaces or functionality to other software.  Exposing this software's functionality only in specialized application to a particular use case does not count as exposing this software's functionality.

Reviewer: Hmmmm, what if you make, say, database software, and someone makes a thin wrapper that pre-processes strings in a way only useful in bioinformatics (or whatever), and then sells that as a "bioinformatics database as a service"? That seems like it would qualify as a "specialized application to a particular use case". Would that go against your intent? Or, as long as it doesn't work as a general-purpose substitute for your database, you'd be A-OK with that?

Author: I would _not_ read the terms above to require contributing that bioinformatics database.

Reviewer: I wouldn't either; is that your intent in crafting this license? Even though it's a thin wrapper that offers almost entirely the same functionality, because it's specialized for bioinformatics, it wouldn't need to be open-sourced?

Author: Ref: https://github.com/kemitchell/api-copyleft-license/issues/35#issuecomment-499280260

<!-- This language functions like a defined term, without falling back on lawyerly conventions that alienate non-lawyer readers. -->

> First, publish all source code for that software, in the preferred form for making changes, through a freely accessible distribution system widely used for similar source code, so contributors and others can find and copy it.

Reviewer: Love it!
